
Linear Elasticity in 3D
=======================

Introduction
------------

This example provides a demonstration of using PyMKS to compute the
linear strain field for a two phase composite material in 3D, and
presents a comparison of the computational efficiency of MKS when
compared with the finite element method. The example first provides
information on the boundary conditions used in MKS. Next, delta
microstructures are used to calibrate the first order influence
coefficients. The influence coefficients are then used to compute the
strain field for a random microstructure. Lastly, the calibrated
influence coefficients are scaled up and are used to compute the strain
field for a larger microstructure and compared with results computed
using finite element analysis.

Elastostatics Equations and Boundary Conditions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A review of the governing field equations for elastostatics can be found
in the Linear Elasticity in 2D example. The same equations are used in
the example with the exception that the second lame parameter (shear
modulus) :math:`\mu` is defined differently in 3D.

.. math::  \mu = \frac{E}{2(1+\nu)} 

In general, generateing the calibration data for the MKS requires
boundary conditions that are both periodic and displaced, which are
quite unusual boundary conditions. The ideal boundary conditions are
given by,

.. math::  u(L, y, z) = u(0, y, z) + L\bar{\varepsilon}_{xx} 

.. math::  u(0, L, L) = u(0, 0, L) = u(0, L, 0) = u(0, 0, 0) = 0  

.. math::  u(x, 0, z) = u(x, L, z) 

.. math::  u(x, y, 0) = u(x, y, L) 

Unfortunaltely, we can't implement these boundary conditions with
`SfePy <http://sfepy.org>`__, the closest we can get is

.. math::  u(L, y, z) = L\bar{\varepsilon}_{xx}

.. math::  u(0, y, z) = 0 

.. math::  u(0, L, L) = u(0, 0, L) = u(0, L, 0) = u(0, 0, 0) = 0  

.. math::  u(x, 0, z) = u(x, L, z) 

.. math::  u(x, y, 0) = u(x, y, L)

This leads to some issues near the edges of the domain and introduces
errors into the resizing of the coefficients. We are working to fix this
issue, but note that the problem is not with the MKS regression itself,
but with the calibration data used. The finite element package ABAQUS
includes the displaced periodic boundary condition and can be used to
calibrate the MKS regression correctly.

.. code:: python

    %matplotlib inline
    %load_ext autoreload
    %autoreload 2
    
    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    import timeit as tm
Modeling with MKS
-----------------

Calibration Data and Delta Microstructures
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The first order MKS influence coefficients are all that is needed to
compute a strain field of a random microstructure as long as the ratio
between the elastic moduli (also known as the contrast) is less than
1.5. If this condition is met we can expect a mean absolute error of 2%
or less when comparing the MKS results with those computed using finite
element methods [1].

Because we are using distinct phases and the contrast is low enough to
only need the first order coefficients, delta microstructures and their
strain fields are all that we need to calibrate the first order
influence coefficients [2].

The ``make_delta_microstructure`` function from ``pymks.datasets`` can
be used to create the two delta microstructures needed to calibrate the
first order influence coefficients for a two phase microstructure. This
function uses the python module
`SfePy <http://sfepy.org/doc-devel/index.html>`__ to compute the strain
fields using finite element methods.

.. code:: python

    L = 9
    center = (L - 1) / 2
    
    from pymks.tools import draw_microstructures
    from pymks.datasets import make_delta_microstructures
    
    X_delta = make_delta_microstructures(n_phases=2, size=(L, L, L))
    draw_microstructures(X_delta[0, center, :, :], X_delta[1, center, :, :])


.. image:: elasticity_3D_files/elasticity_3D_4_0.png


Using delta microstructures for the calibration of the first order
influence coefficients is essentially the same as using a unit `impulse
response <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Impulse_response>`__ to find the
kernel of a system in signal processing. Delta microstructures are
composed of only two phases. One phase is located only at the center
cell of the microstructure, and the rest made up of the other phase.

Generating Calibration Data
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``make_elasticFEstrain_delta`` function from ``pymks.datasets``
provides an easy interface to generate delta microstructures and their
strain fields, which can then be used for calibration of the influence
coefficients. The function calls the ``ElasticFESimulation`` class to
compute the strain fields with the boundary conditions given above.

In this example, lets look at a two phase microstructure with elastic
moduli values of 80 and 120 and Poisson's ratio values of 0.3 and 0.3
respectively. Let's also set the macroscopic imposed strain equal to
0.02. All of these parameters used in the simulation must be passed into
the ``make_elasticFEstrain_delta`` function.

.. code:: python

    from pymks.datasets import make_elastic_FE_strain_delta
    from pymks.tools import draw_microstructure_strain
    
    elastic_modulus = (80, 120)
    poissons_ratio = (0.3, 0.3)
    macro_strain = 0.02 
    size = (L, L, L)
    
    t = tm.time.time()
    X_delta, strains_delta = make_elastic_FE_strain_delta(elastic_modulus=elastic_modulus,
                                                          poissons_ratio=poissons_ratio,
                                                          size=size, macro_strain=macro_strain)
    print 'Elapsed Time',tm.time.time() - t, 'Seconds'

.. parsed-literal::

    Elapsed Time 70.2430000305 Seconds


Let's take a look at one of the delta microstructures and the
:math:`\varepsilon_{xx}` strain field.

.. code:: python

    draw_microstructure_strain(X_delta[0, center, :, :], strains_delta[0, center, :, :])


.. image:: elasticity_3D_files/elasticity_3D_9_0.png


Calibrating First Order Influence Coefficients
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now that we have the delta microstructures and their strain fields, we
can calibrate the influence coefficients by creating an instance of a
bases and the ``MKSRegressionModel`` class. Because we have 2 discrete
phases we will create an instance of the ``DiscreteIndicatorBasis`` with
``n_states`` equal to 2, and then pass the basis in to create an
instance of the ``MKSRegressionModel``. The delta microstructures and
their strain fields are then passed to the ``fit`` method.

.. code:: python

    from pymks import MKSRegressionModel
    from pymks.bases import DiscreteIndicatorBasis
    
    basis = DiscreteIndicatorBasis(n_states=2)
    MKSmodel = MKSRegressionModel(basis=basis)
Now, pass the delta microstructures and their strain fields into the
``fit`` method to calibrate the first order influence coefficients.

.. code:: python

    MKSmodel.fit(X_delta, strains_delta)
That's it, the influence coefficient have be calibrated. Let's take a
look at them.

.. code:: python

    from pymks.tools import draw_coeff
    
    coeff = MKSmodel.coeff
    draw_coeff(coeff[center])


.. image:: elasticity_3D_files/elasticity_3D_15_0.png


The influence coefficients for :math:`h=0` have a Gaussian-like shape,
while the influence coefficients for :math:`h=1` are constant-valued.
The constant-valued influence coefficients may seem superfluous, but are
equally as import. They are equivalent to the constant term in multiple
linear regression with `categorical
variables <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dummy_variable_%28statistics%29>`__.

Predict of the Strain Field for a Random Microstructure
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Let's now use our instance of the ``MKSRegressionModel`` class with
calibrated influence coefficients to compute the strain field for a
random two phase microstructure and compare it with the results from a
finite element simulation.

The ``make_elasticFEstrain_random`` function from ``pymks.datasets`` is
an easy way to generate a random microstructure and its strain field
results from finite element analysis.

.. code:: python

    from pymks.datasets import make_elastic_FE_strain_random
    
    np.random.seed(99)
    t = tm.time.time()
    X, strain = make_elastic_FE_strain_random(n_samples=1, elastic_modulus=elastic_modulus,
                                              poissons_ratio=poissons_ratio, size=size, macro_strain=macro_strain)
    print 'Elapsed Time',(tm.time.time() - t), 'Seconds'
    draw_microstructure_strain(X[0, center] , strain[0, center])

.. parsed-literal::

    Elapsed Time 32.0750000477 Seconds



.. image:: elasticity_3D_files/elasticity_3D_18_1.png


**Note that the calibrated influence coefficients can only be used to
reproduce the simulation with the same boundary conditions that they
were calibrated with**

Now to get the strain field from the ``MKSRegressionModel`` just pass
the same microstructure to the ``predict`` method.

.. code:: python

    t = tm.time.time()
    strain_pred = MKSmodel.predict(X)
    print 'Elapsed Time',tm.time.time() - t,'Seconds'

.. parsed-literal::

    Elapsed Time 0.000999927520752 Seconds


Finally let's compare the results from finite element simulation and the
MKS model.

.. code:: python

    from pymks.tools import draw_strains_compare
    
    draw_strains_compare(strain[0, center], strain_pred[0, center])


.. image:: elasticity_3D_files/elasticity_3D_22_0.png


Let's look at the difference between the two plots.

.. code:: python

    from pymks.tools import draw_diff
    
    draw_diff((strain[0, center] - strain_pred[0, center]), title='Finite Element - MKS')


.. image:: elasticity_3D_files/elasticity_3D_24_0.png


The MKS model is able to capture the strain field for the random
microstructure after being calibrated with delta microstructures.

Resizing the Coefficeints to use on Larger Microstructures
----------------------------------------------------------

The influence coefficients that were calibrated on a smaller
microstructure can be used to predict the strain field on a larger
microstructure though spectral interpolation [3], but accuracy of the
MKS model drops slightly. To demonstrate how this is done, let's
generate a new larger :math:`N` by :math:`N` random microstructure and
its strain field.

.. code:: python

    N = 3 * L
    center = (N - 1) / 2
    t = tm.time.time()
    X = np.random.randint(2, size=(1, N, N, N))
The influence coefficients that have already been calibrated need to be
resized to match the shape of the new larger microstructure that we want
to compute the strain field for. This can be done by passing the shape
of the new larger microstructure into the 'resize\_coeff' method.

.. code:: python

    MKSmodel.resize_coeff(X[0].shape)
Because the coefficients have been resized, they will no longer work for
our original :math:`L` by :math:`L` sized microstructures they were
calibrated on, but they can now be used on the :math:`N` by :math:`N`
microstructures. Just like before, just pass the microstructure as the
argument of the ``predict`` method to get the strain field.

.. code:: python

    from pymks.tools import draw_strains
    
    t = tm.time.time()
    strain_pred = MKSmodel.predict(X)
    print 'Elapsed Time',(tm.time.time() - t), 'Seconds'
    draw_strains(strain_pred[0, center], title='xx')

.. parsed-literal::

    Elapsed Time 0.00500011444092 Seconds



.. image:: elasticity_3D_files/elasticity_3D_31_1.png


References
----------

[1] Binci M., Fullwood D., Kalidindi S.R., *A new spectral framework for
establishing localization relationships for elastic behav ior of
composites and their calibration to finite-element models*. Acta
Materialia, 2008. 56 (10): p. 2272-2282
`doi:10.1016/j.actamat.2008.01.017 <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2008.01.017>`__.

[2] Landi, G., S.R. Niezgoda, S.R. Kalidindi, *Multi-scale modeling of
elastic response of three-dimensional voxel-based microstructure
datasets using novel DFT-based knowledge systems*. Acta Materialia,
2009. 58 (7): p. 2716-2725
`doi:10.1016/j.actamat.2010.01.007 <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2010.01.007>`__.

[3] Marko, K., Kalidindi S.R., Fullwood D., *Computationally efficient
database and spectral interpolation for fully plastic Taylor-type
crystal plasticity calculations of face-centered cubic polycrystals*.
International Journal of Plasticity 24 (2008) 1264–1276
`doi;10.1016/j.ijplas.2007.12.002 <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijplas.2007.12.002>`__.

[4] Marko, K. Al-Harbi H. F. , Kalidindi S.R., *Crystal plasticity
simulations using discrete Fourier transforms*. Acta Materialia 57
(2009) 1777–1784
`doi:10.1016/j.actamat.2008.12.017 <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2008.12.017>`__.
