
Linear Elasticity in 2D
=======================

Introduction
------------

This example provides a demonstration of using PyMKS to compute the
linear strain field for a two phase composite material. The example
introduces the governing equations of linear elasticity along with the
unique boundary conditions required for the MKS. It subsequently
demonstrates how to generate data for delta microstructures and then use
this data to calibrate the first order MKS influence coefficients for
all strain fields. The calibrated influence coefficients are used to
predict the strain response for a random microstructure and the results
are compared with those from finite element. Finally, the influence
coefficients are scaled up and the MKS results are again compared with
the finite element data for a large problem.

PyMKS uses the finite element tool `SfePy <http://sfepy.org>`__ to
generate both the strain fields to fit the MKS model and the
verification data to evaluate the MKS model's accuracy.

Elastostatics Equations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For the sake of completeness a description of the equations of linear
elasticity are included. The constitutive equation that describes the
linear elastic phenomena is Hook's law.

.. math::  \sigma_{ij} = C_{ijkl}\varepsilon_{kl} 

:math:`\sigma` is the stress, :math:`\varepsilon` is the strain, and
:math:`C` is the stiffness tensor that relates the stress to the strain
fields. For an isotropic material the stiffness tensor can be
represented by lower dimension terms which can relate the stress and the
strain as follows.

.. math::  \sigma_{ij} = \lambda \delta_{ij} \varepsilon_{kk} + 2\mu \varepsilon_{ij}  

:math:`\lambda` and :math:`\mu` are the first and second Lame parameters
and can be defined in terms of the Young's modulus :math:`E` and
Poisson's ratio :math:`\nu` in 2D.

.. math::  \lambda = \frac{E\nu}{(1-\nu)(1-2\nu)} 

.. math::  \mu = \frac{E}{3(1+\nu)} 

Linear strain is related to displacement using the following equation.

.. math::  \varepsilon_{ij} = \frac{u_{i,j}+u_{j,i}}{2} 

We can get an equation that relates displacement and stress by plugging
the equation above back into our expression for stress.

.. math::  \sigma_{ij} = \lambda u_{k,k} + \mu( u_{i,j}+u_{j,i})  

The equilibrium equation for elastostatics is defined as

.. math::  \sigma_{ij,j} = 0 

and can be cast in terms of displacement.

.. math::  \mu u_{i,jj}+(\mu + \lambda)u_{j,ij}=0 

In this example, a displacement controlled simulation is used to
calculate the strain. The domain is a square box of side :math:`L` which
has an macroscopic strain :math:`\bar{\varepsilon}_{xx}` imposed.

In general, generateing the calibration data for the MKS requires
boundary conditions that are both periodic and displaced, which are
quite unusual boundary conditions and are given by,

.. math::  u(L, y) = u(0, y) + L\bar{\varepsilon}_{xx}

.. math::  u(0, L) = u(0, 0) = 0  

.. math::  u(x, 0) = u(x, L) 

Modeling with MKS
-----------------

Calibration Data and Delta Microstructures
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The first order MKS influence coefficients are all that is needed to
compute a strain field of a random microstructure as long as the ratio
between the elastic moduli (also known as the contrast) is less than
1.5. If this condition is met we can expect a mean absolute error of 2%
or less when comparing the MKS results with those computed using finite
element methods [1].

Because we are using distinct phases and the contrast is low enough to
only need the first order coefficients, delta microstructures and their
strain fields are all that we need to calibrate the first order
influence coefficients [2].

Here we use the ``make_delta_microstructure`` function from
``pymks.datasets`` to create the two delta microstructures needed to
calibrate the first order influence coefficients for a two phase
microstructure. The ``make_delta_microstructure`` function uses SfePy to
generate the data

.. code:: python

    %matplotlib inline
    %load_ext autoreload
    %autoreload 2
    
    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
.. code:: python

    L = 21
    
    from pymks.tools import draw_microstructures
    from pymks.datasets import make_delta_microstructures
    
    X_delta = make_delta_microstructures(n_phases=2, size=(L, L))
    draw_microstructures(X_delta[0], X_delta[1])


.. image:: elasticity_2D_files/elasticity_2D_4_0.png


Using delta microstructures for the calibration of the first order
influence coefficients is essentially the same as using a unit `impulse
response <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Impulse_response>`__ to find the
kernel of a system in signal processing. Any given delta microstructure
is composed of only two phases with the center cell having an
alternative phase from the remainder of the domain.

Generating Calibration Data
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``make_elasticFEstrain_delta`` function from ``pymks.datasets``
provides an easy interface to generate delta microstructures and their
strain fields, which can then be used for calibration of the influence
coefficients. The function calls the ``ElasticFESimulation`` class to
compute the strain fields with the boundary conditions given above.

In this example, lets look at a two phase microstructure with elastic
moduli values of 100 and 120 and Poisson's ratio values of 0.3 and 0.3
respectively. Let's also set the macroscopic imposed strain equal to
0.02. All of these parameters used in the simulation must be passed into
the ``make_elasticFEstrain_delta`` function. Note that
``make_elasticFEstrain_delta`` does not take a number of samples
argument as the number of samples to calibrate the MKS is fixed by the
number of phases.

.. code:: python

    from pymks.datasets import make_elastic_FE_strain_delta
    from pymks.tools import draw_microstructure_strain
    
    elastic_modulus = (100, 120)
    poissons_ratio = (0.3, 0.3)
    macro_strain = 0.02
    size = (L, L)
    
    X_delta, y_delta = make_elastic_FE_strain_delta(elastic_modulus=elastic_modulus,
                                                    poissons_ratio=poissons_ratio,
                                                    size=size, macro_strain=macro_strain) 
Let's take a look at one of the delta microstructures and the
:math:`\varepsilon_{xx}` strain field.

.. code:: python

    draw_microstructure_strain(X_delta[0], y_delta[0])


.. image:: elasticity_2D_files/elasticity_2D_9_0.png


Calibrating First Order Influence Coefficients
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now that we have the delta microstructures and their strain fields, we
can calibrate the influence coefficients by creating an instance of the
``MKSRegressionModel`` class. Because we have 2 phases we will create an
instance of MKSRegressionModel with the number of states ``n_states``
equal to 2. Then, pass the delta microstructures and their strain fields
to the ``fit`` method.

.. code:: python

    from pymks import MKSRegressionModel
    from pymks import DiscreteIndicatorBasis
    
    basis = DiscreteIndicatorBasis(n_states=2, domain=[0, 1])
    MKSmodel = MKSRegressionModel(basis=basis)
Now, pass the delta microstructures and their strain fields into the
``fit`` method to calibrate the first order influence coefficients.

.. code:: python

    MKSmodel.fit(X_delta, y_delta)
That's it, the influence coefficient have be calibrated. Let's take a
look at them.

.. code:: python

    from pymks.tools import draw_coeff
    
    draw_coeff(MKSmodel.coeff)


.. image:: elasticity_2D_files/elasticity_2D_15_0.png


The influence coefficients for :math:`h=0` have a Gaussian-like shape,
while the influence coefficients for :math:`h=1` are constant-valued.
The constant-valued influence coefficients may seem superfluous, but are
equally as import. They are equivalent to the constant term in multiple
linear regression with `categorical
variables <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dummy_variable_%28statistics%29>`__.

Predict the Strain Field for a Random Microstructure
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Let's now use our instance of the ``MKSRegressionModel`` class with
calibrated influence coefficients to compute the strain field for a
random two phase microstructure and compare it with the results from a
finite element simulation.

The ``make_elasticFEstrain_random`` function from ``pymks.datasets`` is
an easy way to generate a random microstructure and its strain field
results from finite element analysis.

.. code:: python

    from pymks.datasets import make_elastic_FE_strain_random
    
    np.random.seed(99)
    X, strain = make_elastic_FE_strain_random(n_samples=1, elastic_modulus=elastic_modulus,
                                              poissons_ratio=poissons_ratio, size=size, 
                                              macro_strain=macro_strain)
    a = draw_microstructure_strain(X[0] , strain[0])


.. image:: elasticity_2D_files/elasticity_2D_18_0.png


**Note that the calibrated influence coefficients can only be used to
reproduce the simulation with the same boundary conditions that they
were calibrated with**

Now to get the strain field from the ``MKSRegressionModel`` just pass
the same microstructure to the ``predict`` method.

.. code:: python

    strain_pred = MKSmodel.predict(X)
Finally let's compare the results from finite element simulation and the
MKS model.

.. code:: python

    from pymks.tools import draw_strains_compare
    
    draw_strains_compare(strain[0], strain_pred[0])


.. image:: elasticity_2D_files/elasticity_2D_22_0.png


Lastly, let's look at the difference between the two strain fields.

.. code:: python

    from pymks.tools import draw_diff
    
    draw_diff((strain[0] - strain_pred[0]), title='Finite Element - MKS')


.. image:: elasticity_2D_files/elasticity_2D_24_0.png


The MKS model is able to capture the strain field for the random
microstructure after being calibrated with delta microstructures.

Resizing the Coefficients to use on Larger Microstructures
----------------------------------------------------------

The influence coefficients that were calibrated on a smaller
microstructure can be used to predict the strain field on a larger
microstructure though spectral interpolation [3], but accuracy of the
MKS model drops slightly. To demonstrate how this is done, let's
generate a new larger random microstructure and its strain field.

.. code:: python

    N = 3 * L 
    size = (N, N)
    print size
    
    X, strain = make_elastic_FE_strain_random(n_samples=1, elastic_modulus=elastic_modulus,
                                              poissons_ratio=poissons_ratio, size=size, 
                                              macro_strain=macro_strain)
    
    draw_microstructure_strain(X[0] , strain[0])

.. parsed-literal::

    (63, 63)



.. image:: elasticity_2D_files/elasticity_2D_27_1.png


The influence coefficients that have already been calibrated need to be
resized to match the shape of the new larger microstructure that we want
to compute the strain field for. This can be done by passing the shape
of the new larger microstructure into the 'resize\_coeff' method.

.. code:: python

    MKSmodel.resize_coeff(X[0].shape)
Let's now take a look that ther resized influence coefficients.

.. code:: python

    draw_coeff(MKSmodel.coeff)


.. image:: elasticity_2D_files/elasticity_2D_31_0.png


Because the coefficients have been resized, they will no longer work for
our original :math:`L` by :math:`L` sized microstructures they were
calibrated on, but they can now be used on the :math:`N` by :math:`N`
microstructures. Just like before, just pass the microstructure as the
argument of the ``predict`` method to get the strain field.

.. code:: python

    strain_pred = MKSmodel.predict(X)
    
    draw_strains_compare(strain[0], strain_pred[0])


.. image:: elasticity_2D_files/elasticity_2D_33_0.png


Again, let's look at the difference between the two strain fields.

.. code:: python

    draw_diff((strain[0] - strain_pred[0]), title='Finite Element - MKS')


.. image:: elasticity_2D_files/elasticity_2D_35_0.png


As you can see, the results from the strain field computed with the
resized influence coefficients is not as close to the finite element
results as they were before they were resized. This decrease in accuracy
is expected when using spectral interpolation [4].

References
----------

[1] Binci M., Fullwood D., Kalidindi S.R., A new spectral framework for
establishing localization relationships for elastic behavior of
composites and their calibration to finite-element models. Acta
Materialia, 2008. 56 (10) p. 2272-2282
`doi:10.1016/j.actamat.2008.01.017 <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2008.01.017>`__.

[2] Landi, G., S.R. Niezgoda, S.R. Kalidindi, Multi-scale modeling of
elastic response of three-dimensional voxel-based microstructure
datasets using novel DFT-based knowledge systems. Acta Materialia, 2009.
58 (7): p. 2716-2725
`doi:10.1016/j.actamat.2010.01.007 <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2010.01.007>`__.

[3] Marko, K., Kalidindi S.R., Fullwood D., Computationally efficient
database and spectral interpolation for fully plastic Taylor-type
crystal plasticity calculations of face-centered cubic polycrystals.
International Journal of Plasticity 24 (2008) 1264–1276
`doi;10.1016/j.ijplas.2007.12.002 <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijplas.2007.12.002>`__.

[4] Marko, K. Al-Harbi H. F. , Kalidindi S.R., Crystal plasticity
simulations using discrete Fourier transforms. Acta Materialia 57 (2009)
1777–1784
`doi:10.1016/j.actamat.2008.12.017 <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2008.12.017>`__.
